1983 for the history of College Station Project at
Colonel
Anderson's house. It was Texas' first effort to
assist in the educational process. This is the
oldest state school and the only state school at
its inception.
Nothing which is on the campus now was here, of
course, at that time. It was just simply open ranch
or farm land.
The school, of course, had had a very limited group
of buildings to house a student body and a meager
core of teachers to instruct them.
have no idea how primitive it was in those days.
College Station was nothing. It was simply the
beginnings of A&M College. All of the people who
were here at the beginning served the college in
some capacity. They either were teachers or
administrators.
And there weren't many teachers or
administrators or students as far as that's
concerned. But they
were off to a good start, and that is the beginning
of the city of College Station.
There was no Highway 6 at that time. There was no
southern
limit to the campus, which was then a barbed
wire fence, which is now Jersey Street. The
college grew and a few people, mostly a colored
group,
constructed a few houses which is on Fireview
Street.
They served the college in
servant capacity, as all of the professors lived
on the campus,
in campus-owned houses.
We had two railroads
and one
road which went north and south and none that went
east and west.
This continued as the city grew and the park which
is now south of the campus,
began to
attract people who were hangers-on or who were
professors
in the increasingly in increasing need for such
people. They started,
when the space on the campus for campus teachers
played out, people began to build homes down in the
place called College Park.
until this took place, the whole, that was
excellent quail hunting area. And the
road to our east, to this lane that went to the
sulfur spines,
That area was used by the early farming
sections of the college as experiment
stations later on. I can recall some excellent
dove shooting there. I could go out and get my limit
of doves before 8 o'clock in the morning. This is
where City Hall is now? This is between here and the
east. City Hall? Where City Hall is? City Hall? The
City Hall? Where it is presently? The City Hall...
The first City Hall was...
at the present north, near the present north gate,
in a home over Joe Soslick's studio. We had one
room, one girl, one policeman,
and
And no bonded indebtedness. That's wonderful.
In regard to the no bonded indebtedness,
when we needed something, we just asked the people
to pay their part. Now, for instance, we had no
water. We had no sewer system. Everybody had these
underground
septic tanks.
We had no metered water distribution system.
Everybody paid the same price. Later on, when we
decided that we should have meters, we didn't
think of borrowing money and buying them and
putting them in. We just asked the people to pay for
them. So everybody paid for their own meter, and
that's the way we operated in those days. We didn't
have any bondage indebtedness. As the city grew,
which it did south and then to the east. It was
because of developers doing the building and
installing the utilities.
The city bought these installations and paid for
them in the fees which they collected by their use.
Let's go back a little bit to the beginnings again.
We had very few students, very few of anything. The
facilities were few and limited. But we did have
installations like the horse barn, and that is
where the system building is at the head of Walton
Street. We had Hog Barn, which is where the golf
shop is.
And the
people that ran the around the hog barn were
bothered about their hogs having cholera, and so
they encouraged old Oxbreg and me to come over
there with our shotguns and shoot the pigeons. And
so that added, that was
quite a quite an attraction for we two old hunter
type people. Now
you might bring that about where we shot the doves
when the seeds fell out of the
No, I didn't want to duplicate stuff. Oh, no,
that's quite all right. So, the flesh,
how much of it is there? That's the firstborn and
the hog. Yes, both
of them. We had a football team and And we had, I
suppose, maybe one or two other types of
activities. But we didn't have much stadium. They
started off, of course, standing up on the
sidelines like they did everywhere else. And then
we built a stadium.
and we picked that stadium up at the end of the
football season and we carted it over to just east
of the Fred's swimming pool where home base was for
the baseball team. And around the baseball field
was
place where we had a straightaway on that track was
between home base and third base. And then it went
on in that direction, which paralleled the 220
yard section of the track, went on parallel to the
Joe Routt Bush, the red start.
And that gives you an idea of how primitive things
were around here
in the United States. Now, after a
good many years, then the one street, which was
Fairview Street,
All
these roads, there was very little need for
east-west intersections, for east-west roads.
People had, after we got years and years after the
beginnings around here, we had some schools over
to our east. Everybody had to come up to New Jersey
to go east or west. And there were a few roads, but
none of them went east or west of more than one or two
blocks, and then they'd stop. There wasn't a
single one that the kids could go to school at Old
Consolidated without coming up to Jersey and
going there to get to Consolidated.
He gave us a street from all the way from the Weldon
Road to the school system. He had to go across one
barbed wire fence between Timber and Lee Street.
There's a barbed wire fence that went
in those days, he gave those lots to the city. And
that was one of the finest and the biggest gifts
that anybody ever gave the city of College
Station. For a street? For a street. He gave us, at
one time, he gave us enough vacant lots
from the Weldon Road clear through to Timber
Street. Do you know what street? So we, Timber. It
is post, it is, uh,
oh, I already, I'm slow on my mind.
It is, uh,
It has a little park down here.
Parkway. Parkway? Parkway. Okay. He gave us a
parkway so that the people would go east.
That was good. I want to recommend to the present
city council that they name our street for a
personal purchase. I'll have to tell them that,
but that's a good idea. You get that in there.
That's a good idea.
find some street somewhere and call it Burgess,
the Burgess Street. That's in my book. Now,
and by the way, Herschel Burgess owned that one
room where the city council was meeting. We rented
that one room from .
I wanted
to
ask some information about your background.
Where were you born?
I trimmed the top of that tree out there. I had a
brush file out there. I can't show you here. But I
cut a whole bunch of poison ivy out of my son's
pile. Oh, I shouldn't be talking. He lives in
Brown, and we live in College Station.
between the two places. And did you do this
recently? Did you cut the trees recently? Huh? Did
you do this recently? Oh, I did. Some of it
yesterday.
Oh, my heavens. My running gear has been in there
for a while. I don't know about my motor, and I don't
know about some of the other functions, but as far
as my muscle and bone, they're all right. Oh,
that's great. Were your parents from Tennessee
also? Who? Your parents? I was born in Sparta,
Tennessee. And were your parents from Tennessee?
Well, my parents came over here in 1780.
I go back with five different families to the
Revolution. That's wonderful. They all came to
Tennessee as they migrated. From? From the east,
the Alliganders crossed over into west
Tennessee, east Tennessee, and then they came all
across the Cumberlands to the middle Tennessee
and started from just this, just barely in the
middle Tennessee.
Prettiest country in the world. Oh, waterfalls
there, oh, they'd be so, so, so nice. Maybe just
such a fine place to live. It freezes every night
and thaws every morning. That's not nice. But the
people there, they figured that if they lived
through March, they got it made. What did your
parents do? Oh, my grandfather was a miller, and my
great-grandfather was a miller and a lawyer.
They, of course, Sparta had one raid by the
northern cavalry, but they didn't do any damage to
the place. They burned a lot of stuff north of the
town there.
But they didn't bother to run down his mill, but
they didn't go out and go to the west of it.
My grandparents didn't like the Yankees. They
didn't like the Yankees. He had slaves.
My son over here has a fireplace. A lot of the bricks
in the face of that fireplace were molded by those
slaves of William Anderson.
Oh, I've got plenty. I can't talk too much about me,
because this is about sitting on the station. So
what other things would you like? Well, I'll tell
you one reason. I told them, I don't like
politicians. I just simply don't like
politicians, because they're not good citizens,
mostly. Because they spend your and my money in
order to get re-elected. They waste our money to
get re-elected. All of this stuff going on in
Washington is this interest and that interest and
that interest has its lobbyists to go in there and
buy these people off. They'll say, you'll never be
re-elected unless you support me. And we got
Graham, who's a grand, grand boy. And he's He's
whipping some of these people a little bit. But I
just don't like, I don't like a democracy. But
it's, I wouldn't give it up. It's the best we have.
It gives us liberty. But it also gives us liberty to
almost shoot somebody. We can do nearly anything.
It gives us the liberty to starve or steal. And we
can't keep the people from starving. Now, way back
in the early Greeks, there was a very fine old
philosopher who said, our democracy is a
wasteful,
inefficient type of government. You can't get
anything done if the politicians mess it up. Now,
that happened a long time ago. Now, they're still
doing the same thing, but we can't give it up
because we can do... Over in Russia, they say,
here, you used to be a serf. They won't tell it in
this. And you used to feel like you had it in for
these people up here, all these rich folks. All
right, you rebelled. And they shot the rich folks
that you were working for But they put a hole in your
hand, and you said, boy, you're going to hole. And
they go over here to this factory, and they give you
a card and say, you're working in this factory, and
that's where you're going to work, bud, and you're
not going to strike either. Now, history repeats
itself. We're headed for the same thing. If we
don't get strong, Russia will take us over. And
then there'll be more poor folks than there are
rich folks, and they'll get rid of the rich folks.
And the poor folks will wake up as slaves of the army
and of the people that are running things in
Russia. They're coming right on after us. They've
come already in Cuba, and they're coming out of
South America. And they're spending $3 or $4 to one
for us. They get ready to dictate a peace to us. They
say, will you surrender or shall we pauperize?
You were in World War I, is that right? You were in
World War I? And II. I was in both of them. Okay. I
left the mayor's job to go into the Army, but I
wasn't going to run again. Oh, really? I was not
going to run again because I promised them I would
serve one term. And then I would not retreat myself
because
they won't like me because I will not buy their
water meter. And I will expect them to do their
part. And people don't like that. They like to do it
for them. They'd rather you borrow the money. And
I'm just that type. And I knew, oh, I might have been
re-elected. I don't know. Because after all,
there are more people who believe like me than
believe otherwise, I think. But I don't know about
that now. Well, at least I told them I'll serve one
term, just like you're supposed to serve on the
jury once at least. And then, by golly, you don't
have to anymore. If you're a good citizen, you'll
do what you're asking for your part. But people
might not want me, because they may not want to buy
that water meter. Now I'm just using that as a .. But
when I was mayor, I shot skunks. I shot mad dogs. I
did everything that a police department and
everything else had to do. And I enjoyed it. I was a
coach, you see, which I didn't have anything else
pressing on me. If I'd have been the athletic
director or the head football coach, it may have
been different. But I was a freshman coach, and I
until I retired and I was here from 1920 through 57
and never was fired and never did quit. And they
named the truck for me. Is that right? It's Frank
Anderson's truck? That's wonderful. Let me show
you something here. It might be well for me to talk
when I shouldn't be listening, but I rather enjoy
the fact that I did something at A&M College to help
it grow. I'd
been here for about 20 years when Dr. Walton, the
college president, asked me to take the
commandant's job. Well, he probably regretted
that because I pitched a hot potato in his lap. I was
a tough commandant. This place needed somebody to
start the ball rolling in another new direction.
It needed to grow. When I came out here, they had
1,700 students, a freshman found himself in a
company of 35 people.
At the end of that year, some of those companies
didn't have half of them. They just ran the
freshmen off by tough hazing. And as a track coach,
I had a pretty hard time keep getting a good track
man to come here. If I got one to come here, they
wouldn't respect him. They'd respect a freshman
football man, but they wouldn't respect a
freshman track man. And these boys, maybe the one
of them are at home, well, they thought they were
pretty good stuff. And they come here, and some
good-for-nothing sophomore will beat his rear
and have him to serve them, make their bed up,
seniors and juniors and whatnot. And that was
keeping this school from growing. But I was tough.
I was pretty tough. And I did a lot of things, among
which was start a new tradition. I can claim one
tradition, a legal bonfire. The student body used
everything that was loose and some of the things
that weren't, like the faculty's wood pile or
their garden gate. And all of the outside houses
and the other people's backyard, they delighted
on bringing those off as a unit.
All right, now my first, after the bonfire in 1935,
I'm now the
brand new young little commandant. And a very
irate farmer came into my office and said those
damn SOBs ran off of my barn last night, log barn,
and put it on the bonfire.
And so I just get the captains in and I say, well, all
right. That's the last bonfire you're gonna
build. I'm gonna build the next bonfire. Now, I
took, they had a bull ring. Everything that they
wanted to ram a freshman for, give him demerits,
they'd give him demerits. They didn't care about
college regulations, it was their regulations.
So... So...
So we went from there. I took the bullring, and I'll
explain to you what the bullring was. These
freshmen that were rammed for not doing
something. I got some saws and axes and
transportation from the building and grounds
department, and I took the bullring on Saturday
afternoon and Sunday afternoon, and we went out
between here and the drill field and the airport
out there and found plenty of dead or semi-dead
stuff. We brought in, we built a modern log
bonfire. And it just took one year to start a new
tradition here. They're building the same type of
of Bonfire ever since.
What brought you to College Station? Why did you
come here?
As a high school player, I was fast and quick. And
that helped me make four touchdowns against the
team that thought they were the state champions
until they made a mistake and played our high
school team. That was Fitzgerald Clark at
Tullahoma Private School. There weren't many
high schools in Tennessee when I was a youngster.
They were prep schools, privately owned prep
schools. Well, I didn't have anything. Now, I
graduated from that school. I didn't have any
money. I was offered $40 a month to be freight clerk
there at the end of the railroad. I would have taken
it, but a boy from Brandon Training School down at
Shelbyville, Tennessee, sent his son up there,
the headmaster, to recruit me and see if I wouldn't
come down there and play, have another year in high
school. I was already, I had plenty of credits when
I graduated from that high school. But I didn't
have anything else to do, so I decided, well, heck
yeah, that'll be fun. And I went down there and I
took French and German and a little more history.
The ex Bible
was my Latin teacher. I took another year of Latin
down there. We used to take Latin in those days,
four years of Latin before I got through. Now, the
ex Bible was one of the, I would say the top six
coaches that the United States has ever had
anywhere. We were very successful at this Brandon
Training School. I made a lot of touchdowns for
him. And he was a good Christian man, and he taught a
Sunday school class in Mississippi College, the
Baylor of Mississippi, which is at Clinton. Yes,
nine miles this side of Jackson.
I
don't want to repeat.
He
taught a Sunday school class.
And he was very successful as a coach in Middle
Tennessee among those high schools. And there was
a preacher at this church where he taught the
class, was a graduate of Mississippi College. And
they were looking for a coach. And he wrote down
there and said, boy, we've got the fella you want.
He is a dandy. And they asked him to come down there.
He made a favorable impression and they hired him.
He came back up and said, boy you're going to
college with me. I went to college with him and I
graduated with distinction. I made six
touchdowns against the University of
Mississippi in one football game. We beat Tulane,
we beat Mississippi State. Alabama never beat us
more. Well, we led them at a half one time. I
happened to get loose for 80 yards. And we led them
at the half, but they just beat us down. But we never
played anybody at home because we didn't even have
a stadium.
Oh, no. But oldie X... got the job at Texas A&M
College. We both went to the war, First World War.
And he says, I've got to be the freshman coach out
there for one year because they got a man who's got
one year on his contract. But we want you. And so he
said, boy, you go come out there with me. You take
the job there for a year, and in that year, this man
will... be out of the way and I'll be athletic
director and I won't hire you." And so I've been
with that man ever since 1912. He's been dead for
two years. He stayed with us for twelve years and
then he pulled off going to Nebraska and then he
came to Texas and then that's it. That's my story.
And then I've been track coach here for all those
years. What were the years that you were track
coach?
The spring of 22. Since the spring of 22.
Except this time I was out in the Army and was out as
commandant. Now, the board of directors came up
here with all this. They were going to strike on me.
Here's a good story. They made the freshmen,
upperclassmen would make freshmen bring them
some food Sunday morning or something they didn't
want to go. Well, eight demerits for taking food
from the mess hall. So they'd make the freshmen
bring them some food. Well, the freshmen get
caught sometimes. And they would give eight
demerits. That was the college rule. The board of
directors made that rule. If you take food from the
mess hall, it's eight demerits. And demerits
hurts you. Well,
after one year, I'd already made them do this and
made them do that and the other. Made them a
bonfire. They copied it and went on with it, which
was fine. I didn't have to build it the second year
because they didn't quit turning, running off
everybody's stuff. They'd run off with a bunch of
creosoted poles. Well, I made them take them back.
Anything they could get there, they'd use it. Oh,
they were rough and tough in those days. They sure
were. Somebody had to slow them down. All right,
they finally, the board of directors and the
president and so forth, they just said, you
believe in revolution, you don't believe in
evolution. I said, well, we've been getting
nowhere in all these years I've been here, and I'm
just starting. But they said, well, listen, will
you please go on back down to the athletic field?
Oh, no. They didn't want to fire me because here I
had a stack of letters and telegrams that high
supporting me against them, against all these
people that had the kids run off, you see, were on my
side. And they just shared the outfit with, you
back that man, he's what needs, somebody needs to
be done. Well, they got me, they got me, but they
just made nice for me, bent back down to something I
really enjoyed doing, and we really had fun. For
the next, out of the next seven years, we won six
championships in a row. That's wonderful, that's
wonderful. So and I was having a good time and a good
life, but I did get the job done because Gib
Gilchrist, a Texas University graduate, was the
next president of this outfit and he took my
program up and we started to grow. We started to
grow. In 1936, 1937, we had 34,500 students. Now we
have 35,000 students. That's right. Excuse me, I
would like to turn the tape over just one minute.